an international operation to bring
desperately needed Aid into Gaza by sea
is G is gathering momentum a ship uh
carrying humanitarian supplies from an
American charity is preparing to leave
lanica in Cyprus the US and European
Union will work with the United Arab
Emirates and other countries to ship
food medicine and Emergency
Shelters the need for Aid in Gaza is
huge and overnight Israeli strike in
Rafa turned a tower block that once
housed 300 families into
Rebel already fighting hunger these
Palestinians now must live without
shelter we were surprised at night with
knocking on the apartment doors telling
us to evacuate the tower our children
fell on the stairs and women fell a
friend of mine's wife whose 9 months
pregnant fell on the stairs there was a
state of panic and fear you have no idea
the European Union is coordinating these
shipments of food medicine and other
supplies the EU together with the US
United Arab Emirates and other countries
are launching a maritime Corridor for
ships to carry food and medicine to Gaza
the vessels being loaded in Cypress are
nearly ready to
go there are many factors involved in a
mission like this one it's quite a
challenge so I can't predict a timetable
for many reasons because of
and security but as soon as everything
is ready we leave from
here one of the humanitarian agencies
behind the shipment from Cyprus is
constructing its own dock to offload the
aid separately the US military is
planning to build a pier but
construction could take as long as 2
months right now Aid is being dropped
into Gaza from the air planes from
Jordan Egypt the US France and Belgium
are taking part in the operation some a
has trickled in by truck over gaza's
border to Egypt but it's not enough to
meet the needs of hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians with the United Nations
warning that Gaza is on the brink of
famine mik Martin of King's College
London told me what needs to be done
before the aid arrives in
Gaza uh so the the first thing that need
sorting out is the permissions and
paperwork have still not been completed
in Cyprus and part of that is the
Israelis signing off the shipment um the
actual Journey from Cypress to Gaza is
about 200 nautical miles so a ship of
that type could do that in a day or less
if it wanted to and and this is where it
then starts to get very difficult um
according to the Charities involved they
are planning on building or indeed
already are building a pier out to
receive the supplies from the ship it's
very shallow water it's a beach so you
can't just drive the ship up to the the
coast um and assuming they're able to do
that and that's an undisclosed location
for security reasons then there's the
biggest problem of all which is
Distribution on land how do you make
sure that the aid is not mobbed and
stolen you know millions of or thousands
of desperate people how do they
distribute it in a in a fair way and
whose responsibility is is
that so uh you you've basically got two
options uh at the point at which the uh
supplies hit the shore then the the
general idea would be that one of these
Aid agencies would control you know
would warehouse and control the central
stockage of those supplies but then to
get them out to distribution centers uh
located around the Gaza Strip that's a
big problem because at the start of the
conflict the Palestinian police were
still uh on duty but they were carrying
weapons and so they were targeted by the
Israelis because they were carry you
know they were young men carrying
weapons and so they've effectively gone
home and that's one of the reasons why
we've had the breakdown of Law and Order
so some sort of deal that enables those
police to go back to work perhaps
unarmed so that they could ensure that
those suppliers were able to get out is
probably needed in order to get it to
the 10 20 30 distribution points in
different neighborhoods around G
you mentioned the the pier that's uh
going to serve temporarily but the US is
also building its own dock that could
take up to two months to build what form
is that likely to take and and um what
difference would that one
make so the US military has got uh
ready-made equipment uh it's effectively
a floating ponon that that gets anchored
to the seabed and then you build a a
floating uh cause way linking up that
that pontoon to the sea shore and that
equipment is is is in storage and ready
to go which is why I'm quite surprised
that they're saying it's going to take
60 days to get it there the unit of the
US military that that's responsible for
using that equipment has been tasked
already is getting ready to go uh I
would think that the US is able to do it
much quicker than that I I wonder
whether actually they are under
promising so that they can overd deliver
I I think they would able to get it done
much quicker than that because as I say
the equipment will be in storage and
ready to go okay we'll leave it there
for now Mike Martin from Kings College
London thank you for your
analysis thank you very much well
joining me from Cyprus where that ship
is being prepared is eron Gore from the
organization World Central Kitchen it
has supplied the aid that ship is
transporting Aon thanks for your time uh
what kind of Aid are you sending to Gaza
on that ship behind you and how many
people is that going to
help yeah we have 200 tons of food going
out on this first shipment it'll feed
about two million people um this is just
the beginning for us we're going to send
more ships after this um after this
first one goes we already have another
ship on the way and we have another 500
tons of food here in Cyprus ready to be
deployed to Gaza Arin all that
assistance is ready to go how quickly
will it get from there uh into the hands
of
GMS yeah look there's a lot of factors
at play here um whether certainly the
biggest one when you're dealing with a
ship in a maritime Corridor like this um
the the transit itself is about 60 hours
so we are looking to um leave port as
soon as possible and to have the steady
steady supply of just continuous food
flowing from Cyprus to
Gaza um but we are very much at the
mercy of the weather at this point um we
have you know the food is loaded we
actually just finished loading it today
so as soon as we are able to leave port
we will do so so leaving Port is one
thing then there's the transport of 60
hours as you say how will the aid safely
arrive in Gaza given that at this moment
it doesn't have a functioning
port
yeah that's right our team in Gaza is
working very feverishly to build a
temporary Port right now and that
construction has started it is a
critical critical Factor like you said
in getting the food off the boat and
into the hands of Gins which is the
mission right that is success for us and
not only success but a continuous flow
so we have a small team here in Cyprus
we have a bigger team in Gaza we've
served nearly 34 million meals in Gaza
um have really dispatched uh 1,400
trucks and so our operations by by land
now by sea um a little bit by air as
well has really just helped us to get as
M as much food as possible into Gaza
right
now Erin you say that the port or the
dock is under construction how long for
instance do you know how long it would
take to unload that ship behind you and
get that food onto land
uh we will find out this is this is the
first of many and there's like I said a
lot a lot of factors that play World
Central Kitchen our our rule is that we
plan to adapt we tend to meet these
moments and have a whatever it takes
attitude we plan as best we can we do
have some infrastructure ready to get
the food off the barge onto land um but
look we're going to we're going to learn
learn we're going to adapt and we're
going to see how this first um this
first shipment by boat goes but we like
I said we have a team that's on land and
um lots of community helpers we have
with World Central Kitchen nearly 400
Palestinians that are making this
Mission possible so we have a lot of
people a lot of players involved in this
eron just before I let you go what are
the chances that you can match the sort
of volumes that could have been
delivered by Road previously that you'll
now be taking by
SE uh that's a challenge right now let's
see again how this first how this first
run goes um the massive massive amount
of Aid that's needed right now I mean
our one guarantee is by land that
continues to be our Focus here at World
Central Kitchen um we have another ship
on the way there's lots of conversations
by lots of countries that are also going
to deliver Maritime Aid so so we'll see
right now more is more for Gaza and
that's that's a win um as much as we can
keep pushing for all corridors to be
flooded with food right now uh that's
what's needed that's what's needed so
from World Central Kitchen I can say
we're going to do as much as possible
lots of work to be done good luck thanks
eron Gore from the aid organization
World Central
[Music]
kitchen now hi TB West Bank and Gaza
country director for the a agency Care
International in rala Joins me now uh
Hiba so a ship of EU uh of EU with
relief supplies could soon set sail from
Cyprus the USA wants to build a
temporary Port off Gaza to make a bridge
from land in Gaza to see to meet these
Aid ships do we know is this effort this
idea moving forward in
practice thank you Anthony for this
question uh what is matter now is that
we try to find the best most efficient
quickest solution that would allow us to
enter Aid into Gaza of course any kind
of uh potential increase in in
humanitarian assistant is more
assistance is more than welcome H
currently because we are talking about
especially in the north uh around 25% of
the population of Gaza are now moving
one one step away from uh from being H
uh from being declared under famine
stage this means that we are also
hearing about uh children who are in
acute uh malnutrition one of of six
children under the age of two now in the
north of Gaza and we have heard about
the different children that that passed
away unfortunately over the last days
because of uh uh dehydration and hunger
this means that we need to find again
the the most effic efficient solution
the quickest one having that that having
that said we also know that uh as you
mentioned the any effort that is going
to be uh um launched now through the sea
is a good one but it will take two
months and it does not in any way will
be able to replace the already existing
border points the one in RAF potentially
other borders like Ares K Abu Salam all
the points that exist and where we have
already thousands of trucks waiting at
the border to enter at any moment to the
north and to the south of Gaza so with
so much needed what difference would or
or could Aid deliveries by C uh make in
this uh scenario will this give Gaza the
the volume of Aid uh that it
needs unfortunately not if this moment
if In This Moment both while we are
talking a ceasefire is declared the
needs are massive at all levels
infrastructure Level Health level uh
fuel level water food h h services that
exist for different different uh kind of
services that are needed in Gaza are
massive and we need to start working
immediately on Ma Max maximizing the aid
entry over February only 50% of the aid
that made it in January was in in Gaza
was allowed to Gaza and if we used to to
describe this as a drop in the ocean of
the needs you can imagine half of that
is something that is not even equaling
what we used to say half a drop in the
ocean this means that we need to
increase the number of Aid make it more
consistent include different components
for so for instance water medicine
medical equipment uh fuel for for at
least the main services including water
desalination and hospitals and this is
required at at massive level H and this
is why we always say this is unprecedent
as as this is coming on huge huge
scale I TB West Bank and Gaza country
director for the adaa agency Care
International in rala thanks for being
with
us thank you
dear